LO, praise of the prowess of people-kings 

of spear-armed Danes, in days long sped, 

we have heard, and what honor the athelings won! 

Oft Scyld the Scefing from squadroned foes, 

from many a tribe, the mead-bench tore, 

awing the earls. Since erst he lay 

friendless, a foundling, fate repaid him: 

for he waxed under welkin, in wealth he throve, 

till before him the folk, both far and near, 

who house by the whale-path, heard his mandate, 

gave him gifts: a good king he! 

To him an heir was afterward born, 

a son in his halls, whom heaven sent 

to favor the folk, feeling their woe 

that erst they had lacked an earl for leader 

so long a while; the Lord endowed him, 

the Wielder of Wonder, with world's renown. 

Famed was this Beowulf: far flew the boast of him, 

son of Scyld, in the Scandian lands. 

So becomes it a youth to quit him well 

with his father's friends, by fee and gift, 

that to aid him, aged, in after days, 

come warriors willing, should war draw nigh, 

liegemen loyal: by lauded deeds 

shall an earl have honor in every clan.

Forth he fared at the fated moment, 

sturdy Scyld to the shelter of God. 

Then they bore him over to ocean's billow, 

loving clansmen, as late he charged them, 

while wielded words the winsome Scyld, 

the leader beloved who long had ruled.... 

In the roadstead rocked a ring-dight vessel, 

ice-flecked, outbound, atheling's barge: 

there laid they down their darling lord 

on the breast of the boat, the breaker-of-rings, 

by the mast the mighty one. Many a treasure 

fetched from far was freighted with him. 

No ship have I known so nobly dight 

with weapons of war and weeds of battle, 

with breastplate and blade: on his bosom lay 

a heaped hoard that hence should go 

far o'er the flood with him floating away. 

No less these loaded the lordly gifts, 

thanes' huge treasure, than those had done 

who in former time forth had sent him 

sole on the seas, a suckling child. 

High o'er his head they hoist the standard, 

a gold-wove banner; let billows take him, 

gave him to ocean. Grave were their spirits, 

mournful their mood. No man is able 

to say in sooth, no son of the halls, 

no hero 'neath heaven, -- who harbored that freight! 



Now Beowulf bode in the burg of the Scyldings, 

leader beloved, and long he ruled 

in fame with all folk, since his father had gone 

away from the world, till awoke an heir, 

haughty Healfdene, who held through life, 

sage and sturdy, the Scyldings glad. 

Then, one after one, there woke to him, 

to the chieftain of clansmen, children four:

Heorogar, then Hrothgar, then Halga brave; 

and I heard that -- was -- 's queen, 

the Heathoscylfing's helpmate dear. 

To Hrothgar was given such glory of war, 

such honor of combat, that all his kin 

obeyed him gladly till great grew his band 

of youthful comrades. It came in his mind 

to bid his henchmen a hall uprear, 

ia master mead-house, mightier far 

than ever was seen by the sons of earth, 

and within it, then, to old and young 

he would all allot that the Lord had sent him, 

save only the land and the lives of his men. 

Wide, I heard, was the work commanded, 

for many a tribe this mid-earth round, 

to fashion the folkstead. It fell, as he ordered, 

in rapid achievement that ready it stood there, 

of halls the noblest: Heorot he named it 

whose message had might in many a land. 

Not reckless of promise, the rings he dealt, 

treasure at banquet: there towered the hall, 

high, gabled wide, the hot surge waiting 

of furious flame. Nor far was that day 

when father and son-in-law stood in feud 

for warfare and hatred that woke again. 

With envy and anger an evil spirit 

endured the dole in his dark abode,

that he heard each day the din of revel 

high in the hall: there harps rang out, 

clear song of the singer. He sang who knew 

tales of the early time of man, 

how the Almighty made the earth, 

fairest fields enfolded by water, 

set, triumphant, sun and moon 

for a light to lighten the land-dwellers, 

and braided bright the breast of earth 

with limbs and leaves, made life for all 

of mortal beings that breathe and move. 

So lived the clansmen in cheer and revel 

a winsome life, till one began 

to fashion evils, that field of hell. 

Grendel this monster grim was called, 

march-riever mighty, in moorland living, 

in fen and fastness; fief of the giants 

the hapless wight a while had kept 

since the Creator his exile doomed. 

On kin of Cain was the killing avenged 

by sovran God for slaughtered Abel. 

Ill fared his feud, and far was he driven, 

for the slaughter's sake, from sight of men. 

Of Cain awoke all that woful breed, 

Etins and elves and evil-spirits, 

as well as the giants that warred with God 

weary while: but their wage was paid them! 
